Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s part
two of our three-part mini-series on
the theme of the history of animals.
In case you missed part one, we
learned about man’s best friend,
his loyal canine companion, the dog.
Next up, in part three, we will talk about
the mysterious phenomenon of dragons.
But today, in part two, it’s the cat.
How did they come to live with us?
What do we know about them?
What remains a mystery?
And what are some of the most
interesting and unusual facts
about cats through history.
We have a lot to get through, so let’s
not waste a minute, and get right into it.
The cat is, by some measures, the
second most popular animal in the
world, after the dog of course.
There are an estimated 600 million
worldwide, of whom just over a
third are domesticated, house cats.
Perhaps you are listening to this episode
right now with a cat purring beside you,
or there is one on your lap which you
are stroking in a Bond-villain-esque way.
The strange thing is, for the second most
popular animal in the world, we actually
know remarkably little about cats.
We don't fully understand why they purr.
There are theories, but
no scientific consensus.
We don't know exactly why they
bring us dead mice and birds.
Are they teaching us to hunt?
Offering gifts?
Showing off their skills?
Nobody really knows for sure.
We're not entirely sure why adult
cats knead with their paws, pushing
in and out like they're making bread.
And perhaps most mysteriously of all,
we don't really know why cats decided
to live with us in the first place.
Unlike dogs, who co-evolved alongside
humans over tens of thousands of years,
developing an almost telepathic ability
to read our gestures and emotions, cats
remain, well, inscrutable, mysterious.
They live in our homes.
They sleep on our beds.
They grace us with their presence.
But they do so on their own
terms, keeping their secrets,
maintaining an air of mystery.
While a dog might look at you with
utter adoration, a cat will look at you
with what can only be described as mild
disdain, as if to say, "Yes, human, you
may continue existing in my presence."
And yet, despite this aloofness—or
perhaps because of it—hundreds of
millions of people around the world
have chosen to share their homes
with these enigmatic creatures.
So, to understand why cats are so
different from every other animal we've
domesticated, and to understand why
they remain so mysterious after ten
thousand years of living alongside us,
we need to go back to the very beginning.
To a time when cats were not curled up on
sofas, but were wild predators prowling
the edges of the world's first farms.
Imagine, if you will, the Fertile
Crescent about ten thousand years ago.
This region, which spanned parts
of modern-day Iraq, Syria, Turkey,
and Iran, this was where humans
first figured out agriculture.
Instead of following herds of wild
animals and gathering whatever plants they
could find, humans began to plant crops,
harvest grain, and store it for later use.
This was revolutionary.
It meant staying in one place.
It meant building permanent settlements.
It meant the birth of
civilisation as we know it.
But there was a problem.
Grain stores attracted mice
and rats by the bucketload.
But with the mice and rats came other
animals, predators that hunted them.
Enter the African wildcat, a small,
sandy-coloured cat native to the
Middle East and North Africa.
These wildcats were solitary hunters,
and excellent at what they did.
And they quickly realised that these
human grain stores were essentially
an all-you-can-eat buffet of rodents.
So they moved in.
Not because humans encouraged
them or invited them.
Not because humans
captured and tamed them.
They moved in because it made sense.
And here's where the story
of cats diverges dramatically
from the story of dogs.
Dogs, as we learned in the
previous episode, went through a
process of self-domestication over
thirty thousand years or more.
The wolves that became dogs changed
profoundly, in their physical
appearance, in terms of their
behaviour, and even genetically.
Their snouts shortened, their ears
flopped, they developed the ability
to digest human food, they even
grew a special muscle to make those
irresistible "puppy dog eyes."
Cats did none of this.
Cats domesticated themselves too,
in a sense, but firstly, they
did it much more recently, only
about ten thousand years ago.
And secondly, they did it incompletely.
Genetically, your pet cat is around
95% identical to its wild ancestor.
A modern house cat can still
breed with an African wildcat
and produce fertile offspring.
Or to put another way: cats
are barely domesticated at all.
And this goes a long way to
explaining their behaviour.
A dog has been bred for thousands of
generations to understand humans, to
work with humans, to please humans.
A cat?
A cat just needs to be good
at killing small animals.
It doesn't need to understand
your pointing gestures.
It doesn't need to look
to you for guidance.
It doesn't need to care whether
you're happy with it or not.
Because for most of its history
as a "domestic" animal, a cat had
exactly one job: murder rodents.
Kill mice and rats.
If it performed that job well,
humans tolerated its presence.
There was no partnership, no
co-evolution of complex tasks like
herding sheep or pulling sleds.
Cats simply existed near humans
because it was mutually beneficial.
Humans got pest control.
Cats got easy meals.
And critically, in the early
days at least, humans didn't try
to breed cats for temperament.
The friendly cats stuck around, sure, but
there was no strong selection pressure for
friendliness the way there was with dogs.
A grumpy, antisocial cat that
was excellent at hunting was just
as valuable as a friendly one.
Perhaps even more so.
And this arrangement carried on for
thousands of years, with cats living
on the edges of human civilisation,
tolerated but not treasured.
Until, that is, they arrived in Egypt.
If you had to pick one place and time in
history when cats reached the absolute
peak of their social status, it would be
Ancient Egypt, starting around 3,000 BC.
The Egyptians didn't just like cats.
They worshipped them.
One of the most important gods
in ancient Egypt was called
Bastet, or Bast for short.
She was the goddess of home, fertility,
childbirth, and protection, and she
was depicted either as a woman with
the head of a cat, or simply as a cat.
Cats themselves became sacred animals.
Killing a cat, even accidentally,
was punishable by death.
When a family's cat died, the members
of the household would go into mourning,
shaving their eyebrows as a sign of grief.
Cats were mummified and buried with
great ceremony, sometimes with mummified
mice to sustain them in the afterlife.
In 1888, an Egyptian farmer discovered
a cat cemetery containing an estimated
eighty thousand mummified cats.
Eighty thousand.
Now, why do people believe the Egyptians
were so intensely fond of cats?
Well, partly, it was probably practical.
Egypt's economy was particularly
dependent on grain, and cats
protected that grain from rodents.
But it was deeper than that.
Cats were seen as embodying
qualities the Egyptians admired:
grace, cleanliness, being fierce
when necessary, and calm when not.
A cat could be a loving presence in the
home, and a ruthless killer of pests.
It was the perfect animal, the embodiment
of everything ancient Egypt stood for.
And there's a famous story, or
legend, perhaps, that illustrates
just how seriously the Egyptians
took their cat worship.
In 525 BCE, the Persian army laid
siege to the Egyptian city of Pelusium.
According to one report, the Persians
knew about the Egyptians' mania for cats.
The Persian soldiers, so the story
goes, painted images of the cat goddess
Bastet on their shields, and either
carried live cats into battle or released
hundreds of cats onto the battlefield.
The Egyptian soldiers were completely
unwilling to risk harming a single
cat, so they refused to fight back.
And the city fell without much resistance.
Now, there are some question marks
as to whether this actually happened,
but the fact that the story exists
at all gives us an indication of how
highly cats were prized in Egypt.
They weren't just pets.
They were sacred.
And because Egypt was a major
trading power, cats didn't stay
confined to the Nile Valley.
The Egyptians tried to ban the export
of cats, considering them too valuable,
but Phoenician traders smuggled them out
and sold them across the Mediterranean.
Cats spread via trade routes and ships,
where they served a vital function:
pest control on long sea voyages.
By Roman times, cats were found
throughout Europe, Asia, and North Africa.
But their fortunes were
about to take a dark turn.
If Ancient Egypt represented the
peak of the cat's status in human
society, medieval Europe represented
its absolute nadir, its lowest point.
As Christianity spread across Europe
in the early medieval period, cats
began to be viewed with suspicion.
Why?
Well, partly because of their
association with pagan religions.
After all, they'd been
worshipped as gods in Egypt.
But there was something else.
Cats were independent.
Aloof.
Impossible to control.
Dogs were obedient, loyal, seen
as "natural" companions to humans.
Cats, on the other hand, came
and went as they pleased.
They hunted at night.
They seemed to answer to no one.
In a religious and social
order that valued obedience and
hierarchy, the cat's independence
was seen as almost... unnatural.
And by the 13th century, this suspicion
had transformed into something far darker.
Cats, particularly black cats, became
associated with witchcraft and the devil.
The logic, such as it was, went
something like this: witches were in
league with Satan, and Satan could
send them animal companions called
'familiars' to do their bidding.
What better familiar than a cat?
An animal that prowled at night, that
seemed to see in the darkness, that
moved silently and killed without mercy?
Pope Gregory IX allegedly issued a papal
decree in 1233 called Vox in Rama, which
condemned cats as instruments of Satan.
Now, historians debate whether this decree
specifically targeted cats, or whether
it was more broadly about heresy, but
regardless, the result was the same.
Across Europe, particularly
during the height of the witch
trials from the 13th to the 17th
centuries, cats were persecuted.
They were killed en masse.
Burned alive.
Thrown from towers.
Hunted for sport.
In some towns, killing cats
became a form of entertainment.
In France, there was a
tradition of burning bags of
live cats as part of festivals.
If you were a cat, well, life in Medieval
France was about as bad as it got.
And then, in 1347, came the consequences.
The Black Death arrived in Europe,
likely via trading ships from Asia.
The plague was caused by a bacterium
carried by fleas that lived on black rats.
Now, you probably know something about The
Black Death already, and we also have an
episode on it; it’s episode number 129.
Long story short, it would kill somewhere
between 75 and 200 million people—roughly
one-third of Europe's entire population.
And here's the bitter irony: Europeans
had spent the previous century
killing the one animal that could have
helped control the rat population.
Cats.
Now, to be clear, no historian is
suggesting that cats alone could have
stopped the plague, but more cats
would have meant fewer rats, which
would have meant fewer plague-carrying
fleas, and fewer dead bodies.
It was one of history's great tragic
ironies, a cautionary tale about the
dangers of superstition and mass hysteria.
And while Europe was busy persecuting
cats, other parts of the world
took a very different view.
In the Islamic world, cats
remained popular and respected.
The Prophet Muhammad was
said to have loved cats.
In Islamic culture, cats were considered
clean animals, unlike dogs, and were
welcome in homes and even mosques.
They remained valued for their pest
control abilities and their companionship.
Similarly, in parts of Asia,
cats maintained their status.
In Japan, where cats had arrived
around the 6th century, they
became culturally significant.
They appeared in art and literature,
and eventually became symbols
of good fortune—think of the
Maneki-neko, the "lucky cat"
figurine you see in Japanese shops.
Back in Europe, however, it would
take several more centuries before
cats could shake off their demonic
reputation and return to human favour.
The rehabilitation of the cat in European
society began slowly, but by the 19th
century, cats were firmly back in fashion.
During the Victorian era, the same
period when dogs were transitioning
from workers to companions, cats
saw a similar transformation.
But there was a key difference.
Victorian society loved to classify,
categorise, and "improve" things
through selective breeding.
And cats, unlike dogs, had never
really been bred for specific
purposes beyond basic mousing ability.
This was about to change.
In July 1871, the first major cat show
was held at the Crystal Palace in London.
It was organised by a man named Harrison
Weir, an artist and cat enthusiast
who wanted to elevate the status
of cats and promote their breeding.
The show featured over 160 cats,
and it was a massive success.
Thousands of people came to see cats
of different colours, patterns, and
coat lengths, all competing for prizes.
This event sparked the beginning of
the "cat fancy"—the deliberate breeding
of cats for specific aesthetic traits.
Suddenly, cats weren't just mousers
or companions; they were status
symbols, living works of art.
But perhaps the real reason cats made such
a successful comeback in the Victorian
era and beyond had less to do with
fashion and more to do with practicality.
As Europe and North America urbanised
rapidly in the 19th and 20th centuries,
more and more people moved into cities,
into smaller homes and apartments.
Dogs required space.
They needed daily walks.
They demanded attention and training.
They needed to go outside
to go to the toilet.
Cats, on the other hand, were
perfect for urban living.
They were self-sufficient.
They didn't need to be walked.
They were happy in smaller spaces.
They were, in short, the ideal
pet for the modern city dweller.
And then, in 1947, came an invention
that would change cat ownership
forever: the cat litter box.
Before this, cats either went outside
to do their business, or they used
boxes filled with sand or ashes,
which were messy and smelled terrible.
An American businessman called
Edward Lowe had a breakthrough.
He discovered that a particular
type of absorbent clay worked
brilliantly for this purpose.
He packaged it, called it "Kitty Litter,"
and created an entirely new industry.
Suddenly, keeping a cat indoors full-time
became not just possible, but pleasant.
And by the mid-20th century,
particularly after World War
II, cat ownership exploded.
In many countries, cats began
to rival, and in some cases
overtake, dogs in popularity.
Still, despite the hundreds of millions
that live alongside humans today,
and having lived alongside humans for
ten thousand years, there's still so
much we don't understand about them.
Take purring, for example.
You probably think you know why
cats purr—they're happy, right?
Well, maybe.
But cats also purr when they're
stressed, injured, or giving birth.
Scientists have several theories.
One is that purring is a self-soothing
behaviour, a way for cats to calm
themselves in stressful situations.
Another theory suggests that the
frequency of a cat's purr may
actually promote healing, encouraging
bone growth and reducing pain.
Cats may literally be
purring themselves better.
But we don't know for certain.
After thousands of years,
the purr remains a mystery.
Then there's kneading, pushing their
paws in and out like they are making
bread, or bringing you dead animals.
There are plenty of theories about
why cats do this, but no consensus.
There’s a lot we don’t understand,
but an increasing amount we do.
Scientists have made some recent
discoveries about cat behaviour
that are genuinely fascinating.
For one thing, we now know that
cats have somewhere in the region
of 276 different facial expressions.
For comparison, dogs have about 27.
Cats are far more expressive than
we give them credit for, we just
haven't learned to read them properly.
Scientists have also confirmed
what cat owners have long
suspected: cats absolutely can
recognise their owner's voice.
They just... often choose not to respond.
One study played recordings of strangers
calling a cat's name, then recordings
of the cat's owner calling its name.
The cats showed clear recognition of
their owner's voice—their ears moved,
their pupils dilated—but they rarely
bothered to actually come when called.
Dogs, of course, mostly come running
when they hear their owner’s voice.
Cats?
They think about it, decide
whether it's worth their time,
and then usually go back to sleep.
And perhaps that's the most
honest thing about cats.
They live with us, but they
haven't fundamentally changed
who they are to please us.
Your house cat is still 95% wildcat.
It's still a predator, an apex
hunter in a small, fluffy package.
When it's kneading on your lap
and purring, it's not doing
it because you trained it to.
It's doing it because, for
whatever mysterious reason of
its own, it wants or needs to.
And there's one more theory about
cats that I should mention, even
though the scientific evidence for
it is... let's say, controversial.
It involves a parasite
called Toxoplasma gondii.
This parasite can only reproduce
sexually inside a cat's digestive
system, but it can infect other
animals, including humans, usually
through contact with cat faeces.
In most people, it's harmless.
But here's where it gets interesting.
Some scientists have suggested that
Toxoplasma might actually alter human
behaviour in subtle ways, making infected
people more fond of cats, more likely to
keep cats, more tolerant of cat behaviour.
In other words, the parasite might be
manipulating us to ensure its own survival
by making us like its primary host.
The evidence for this is somewhat weak,
and most scientists are sceptical.
But if it were true, it would
be the ultimate cat trick.
Making us think we chose them, when
really, they chose us all along.
So where does this leave us with cats?
They've achieved this remarkable success
by being, fundamentally, themselves.
They didn't co-evolve
with us like dogs did.
They didn't develop special
muscles to make appealing faces.
They didn't learn to understand
our pointing gestures or
look to us for guidance.
They simply decided that living near
humans was convenient, we decided
that having them around was useful,
and things progressed from there.
Now, I should probably have confessed
earlier on in this episode that I
am more of a dog than a cat person.
For me, you can’t beat the unconditional,
undying loyalty and love of a dog.
If you are more of a cat person, you will
probably think this is simple and base.
Dogs love anyone; cats
make you work for it.
And when a cat does decide to
curl up on your lap, or head-butt
your hand demanding attention,
well, you know you've earned it.
Or perhaps the cat is
just cold and you're warm.
Or perhaps it's hungry and you're useful.
With cats, you never quite know.
Dogs, as they say, have owners.
Cats have staff.
And after ten thousand years of this
arrangement, I think we can quite safely
say: that's exactly how they like it.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on cats, the enigmatic,
independent, and utterly mysterious
animals that somehow convinced
us to let them live in our homes.
As a reminder, this was part two
of our three-part mini-series
on animals throughout history.
Next up, in part three, we'll be talking
about an animal that never existed at
all, but has captured human imagination
for thousands of years across almost
every culture on Earth: the dragon.
Fire-breathing, treasure-hoarding,
princess-kidnapping dragons.
You’ve been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.